# Foundations of Computational Social Systems
[Fariba Karimi](https://networkinequality.com/), 2024

Welcome to the online materials for Foundations of Computational Social Systems.

The widespread use of information and communication technologies in our digital society motivates the study of Computational Social Systems, where humans and machines interact in a way that generates new phenomena and data. These new phenomena require an interdisciplinary approach that builds on digital trace data to study Computational Social Systems at global scales, very high frequencies, and unprecedented levels of depth and resolution.

This course focuses on the fundamentals of a computational approach to study new social systems in our digital society. Students in this course learn how to plan, execute, and interpret complete Data Science projects to address questions about human behavior and emergent phenomena in Computational Social Systems. After this course, students will know how to gather data from social media, search trends, and other online and offline sources, how to process and store that data, and how to combine, analyze, and visualize data to address specific questions. The course makes a special emphasis in interpretation and critique of Data Science in the Social Sciences, aiming at an interdisciplinary approach rooted on the understanding of the power and limitations of online technologies for social interaction.

## Who am I?

Fariba Karimi is the Professor for Computational Behavioral and Social Sciences the Graz University of Technology. Fariba Karimi leads the Complexity Science Hub’s computational social science team. Fariba received a PhD in physics and computational science from Umea University, in Sweden, in 2015 and was a PostDoc at GESIS – Leibniz Institute for Social Sciences, in Germany. Fariba’s research focuses on computational social science, the emergence of biases and inequality in networks and algorithms, and modeling human behavior. Her recent research revolves around the topics of visibility of minorities in social networks, the impact of network structure on ranking and recommender algorithms, and disparities in academia and its impact on under-represented groups. She combines statistical analyses of large datasets of online interactions with computational models, agent-based modeling, and network analysis. In 2022, Fariba together with a team of international researchers was awarded an EU Horizon grant to study multi-criteria fairness in AI systems. In 2023, she received the Young Scientist Award from the German Physical Society for her research on inequality in complex networks. Since January 2023, Fariba has also been an assistant professor at TU Wien. I teach this course in collaboration with [Dr. Petar Jerčić](http://www.petarjercic.com/), a postdoctoral researcher in the Computational Social Science Lab, and Benjamin Wolf Röhrich, the student tutor for the course. Several people have contributed to the materials of this course over time, especially [Prof. David Garcia](http://dgarcia.eu/), [Prof. Jana Lasser](https://janalasser.at/) and [Dr. Max Pellert](https://mpellert.at/).
